this meting is being
record and the first order of business
is uh roll call and seating of
alternates and I
see all the
uh commission members here with the
exception of
Leanne and so hello are you there Leanne
oh yes okay you so you're listed as
owner
tonight I don't know what that means but
I guess it's apparently it's me okay
very
good so the uh the entire commission is
present tonight Susan uh we won't be
seating you as an
alterate
um next up are additions and changes to
the agenda oh now it says Leanne okay um
and
uh Christine did you get a hold of the
other person you were trying to get a
hold
of I did reach out to him he hasn't
responded okay in that case if if he was
here I was
gonna I'm here there he is he is here
okay Mike Russo okay very good so
um we've got uh you know first up would
by the agenda would be uh a fairly linky
presentation by uh the Conservation
Commission and so what I would like to
do is move the application for the uh
Field improvements up to before the old
business and uh I don't think you're
going to take too long with us tonight
but that way
uh you won't have to sit around through
all the other business you can go about
and and doing your other stuff there so
I'd like to make a motion to move the
new business item receive application
set public hearing from the town of
Andover for special permit for various
improvements at Long Hill Riverside
Drive up to uh right after public
comment does anybody else have any other
suggested changes or additions deletions
to the
agenda
no hearing none the my motion stands as
is just to move the one item up to the
top of the list tonight looking for a
second I'll second that okay thank you
Scott
um with the with all the attendees here
I can't see everybody that's on the
commission so I'm just going to call
call for a vote uh to approve the motion
an i Scott
hi Patrick I Leanne I and I vote I as
well the motion to uh amend the agenda
is passed um so with that I will turn it
over
to
Christine Eric
uh who wants to
go I think Christine wants to go or Mike
wants to
go I can start us off Christine you can
go ahead I you got it under
control okay um so I was just going to
give you a brief description of the
project uh we are doing improvements to
Long Hill beyond the existing soccer
fields um this is these improvements are
going to include three pickle ball
courts um two playscapes one for ages 2
through 5 years old and then 5 through
12 um and a pavilion uh along with the
development of this area we have a
little bit of surface drainage going in
um we are going to pave the existing
parking area that's um that's the upper
area along Riverside Drive
um the the site isn't going to it has
already been developed you know in the
past 20 plus years so the site is
already completely a disturbed site we
are going to be taking advantage of the
elevations of the BM area at the back of
the soccer fields to put the Pavilion
and the um the playgrounds uh just to
ensure the this area is uh does
experience uh flooding occasionally and
so we're trying to keep those two things
above uh any type of flood area um the
pickle ball quartz will be down in the
lower area um that will probably
experience flooding more than the the
the ridge that's up there um all water
is going to be handled surfac through
swailes and drainage ditches and uh
plunge pools and um it's a pretty
straightforward project and we do think
that the town will benefit as a whole um
for its residents and any future
residents that are looking to move to
the town to be able to have these
Services um the the three main things
that we're planning to do should Target
there should be something there for
every age group to be able to utilize at
some point and um we think yeah the town
will really benefit from having this
area used for this this
service Okay so good thank
you Mike did you want to add anything to
that no I mean Christine spelled it out
perfectly that's our uh you feel that
this project could be a great uh asset
to the community and it's a proper use
of an area that really can't be served
in a lot of other ways and it expands
the current Recreational facility for
the town and um you know as as we've
outlined in some of the checklist items
um for the pnz special permit you know
that we're taking into consideration
you know some of the the challenges that
that do exist in the area making sure
we're trying to mitigate them with uh
with the
process okay Eric anything to add no I
think it's a great project I think we're
very fortunate to uh be able to obtain a
steep Grant to pay for it um and I think
you're you can look forward to a pretty
well thought out
application um and we welcome your
okay Jim uh so uh if you had a chance to
go through your checklist uh yes I okay
I met with um Mike
Christine Eric and Wayne and went over
pretty much the checklist and found they
pointed out actually a couple of things
documents that we're waiting for from
the town engineer and I have had a
conversation with Joe Dylan and he is
well aware of what needs to come in and
indicated he would have it in
shortly pretty much it was there's a
little bit of work on the Storm drainage
and and erosion he's adding some detail
on erosion control um
lighting is we have no detail on
lighting I'm told it's coming in um I
mean if it's if it doesn't come in the
application can be evaluated without it
it it does not need lighting as far as
PGC I I
understand integral part of the the
project but it could certainly be added
later if it if the detail isn't
here that's all I have okay
um I did go through and spend a little
time looking at it
and I I didn't see well one I I couldn't
the plans up enough that we have in the
folder to read the writing that's on
there so I wasn't able to uh to go
through all the notes that were on the
plants but it did look like there was a
uh rosion and sediment control PL but I
didn't see anything that
discussed removal of material to
compensate for material that was added
in the flood
plan so if if that is
well there is a statement required by
way of the
regulations that by by a certified
engineer licensed
engineer stating
that the flood plane Rags are in order
that that they're addressed and I'm kind
of working through that detail um I
haven't fully grasped it yet but I'm I'm
close um and I'm gonna ask Joe to Joe
Dylan to go through that in his
presentation at the public hearing okay
okay j i d all all the material that's
being removed from the flood plane and
it's also being deposited in in a
different place in the same flood
plane okay yeah I just want the the plan
to show that you know the requirement is
that uh we compensate for anything that
we're putting in and want to make sure
that the plan talks about that the
uh I know early on in the project there
was some discussion about making some
changes like irrigation maybe over at
the ball field across the street that's
not part of the project as I understand
it now is that
correct correct so there will not be a
full irrigation plan over there there
will be a PL um a outlet plumbed across
the street and be left there so the h
could be attached to it so not a full
irrigation plan of in the ground but
there part of the scope of the project
does include uh I don't know have the
right terminology but but a pipe to go
across Riverside Drive to be left with
an outlet over there for the ball field
to be used for watering and is that on
the plan now is that shown on the okay
the
U ched the reason why we're not we've
never really comp
considered an inground sprinkler system
there is because that area has much of
that softball field uh sits on top of
the septic in the leech field for the
Hop River Homes so you really can't
under the the way the health code is
even though none of the none of the
sprinkler water is pable you can't mix
that in close Pro proximity with the the
septic you know you can't run sprinkler
lines over a leech field
basically okay no sounds good I remember
that conversation now that you uh
mentioned it
um so my the first question for the
commission
is does anybody on the commission think
or want that we should do a site walk to
go see the plan and I'm not advocating
for that I think the plan uh you know
was pretty easy to
visualize what's going on there but uh I
think it's a big enough project that if
uh if the commission wanted to do a site
walk over there uh we could do that
uh between now and our next
meeting hearing no overwhelming desire
to go do I'll I'll think that that's
probably not so
um J I'd be happy to send out full-size
plans to the commission I think that
would be helpful as I say I went you
tried to read the notes uh and uh it
just didn't copy clearly enough that I
could blow it up and and read with the
notes were so I would like us that I can
do that yep
so at this point uh I will make a motion
to hold a public hearing prior to the
regular planning
zoning
meeting to discuss improvements to the
Andover Memorial Field on 21
January so that would be at 7
o'clock second that thank you an any
discussion on that uh at all
and I will ask I guess Jim or Eric uh
when do we think we will be able to get
all the items that we missing from the
uh engineer so that we have a little
time to review it before the public
hearing would we be able to get like a
week ahead of time well I did make it
clear that we should have everything 10
days prior okay to the meeting 10 days
prior indicated that would not a problem
I'm just using that date because that's
that's the publication and posting date
requirement so it makes
sense that the information be available
at that time
okay any other discussion on uh schedu
of the public
hearing
no and and I guess in a little bit of uh
almost Planning and Zoning humor Eric I
went through my list of 824
referrals and I did not see one for this
project well I suppose we can correct
that at the next meeting I I think we
can I just uh I went through I I would I
I'm sure that it was one of those things
we talked about it it was so early in
the project we decided don't we'll wait
for a while and I don't think we ever
did one so uh that would be uh
I I'll have to look through my notes
because I thought we did one because we
had to go to public
hearing to approve the town's
contribution to this okay yeah we would
have had to have had an 84 prior to
that I think take a look and see if
you've got one I couldn't find one in my
file of 824 stuff so okay
um J put together a list of a24
referrals and it was it's either going
online or is online on the on the
planning zoning web page just for this
very reason to track them okay I'm not
sure whether this one's on here or not
yeah list or not I noticed that Jim very
good
idea thank
you but if we don't have one we'll have
one for the next meeting here so I can't
remember if we voted or not and
uh Jim did we
vote I don't know okay but we're going
to vote again we've got the motion to
hold the public
hearing at 7 o'clock on January 21st
prior to the regular planning zoning
meeting and it was
seconded and we'll call for a vote Ann I
Scott hi
Patrick I Leanne I and I vote I as well
the motion passes
500 thank you Christina Mike I think
we're in good shape look forward to uh
to getting the rest of the stuff uh I
agree that it's a great project for the
town looking forward to it we'll see you
next month thank you
all have a good
night okay um we're going to move down
to old business now and uh first up is
the discussion on the plan of
conservation development Conservation
Commission
input so I see uh Hank and Maryanne here
um Hank are you presenting that
tonight and you're muted
Hank Hank you're still muted sorry sorry
there you go
yeah I'm going to start the presentation
off and then hand it over to Maryanne
for we have a slide of some questions
relating to the process for planning um
Maran will pick up the discussion there
sounds good go ahead um and Jed I'm
assuming you know based on our we're
we're doing the first half of the
presentation tonight correct yes correct
okay can I share am I able to
share um you can try I yeah I think so I
I've enabled sharing all
perfect can folks see that let me see if
I can y we can see it yep I'm not
getting
a blanking me out from being able to
actually start the
slideshow which I don't know why hold on
up top I know but it's not it's grayed
out on me like I can't
it's
weird let me uh let me try the icon
there's a the tiny icon on the lower
right next to the the the zoom slider
bar just to the left of the zoom slider
bar is that's the yeah just to the left
of that to the
left not to the right there you go
that's it slideshow yeah normally it's
up
top that's weird okay all right so um
thank you for the opportunity to present
tonight uh the Conservation Commission
has and it's I don't know why it's
automatically changing on me the
Conservation Commission has spent uh two
years uh pretty much focused on planning
for revision to chapter eight this is an
image of chapter 8 from the 2015 plan of
conservation and development protecting
natural resources and open space plan
nice picture of a a bald eagle there um
so we've spent a couple of years on
planning uh but I thought it would be
good just quickly to reiterate the value
of natural resources and open space to
our
municipalities um they contribute to a
healthy environment for residents uh
especially air and water quality helping
maintain a nice healthy environment for
our residents they mitigate impacts of
climate change which are becoming
increasingly evident with increased
flooding and and uh events that are um
driving changes and challenges for our
infrastructure
um I know Eric's wrestling with all that
with the culverts and so forth um
increased temperatures and changes to
groundwater through droughts um
protection of Natural Resources goes is
a significant role in helping to
mitigate against those impacts uh they
support recreational opportunities for
Town residents especially given um our
major trail system that's going through
the Hop River State Park trail uh
protect biodiversity and critical
habitats and they help maintain a SC
rural character of uh of the
town uh so over the past two years um
we've gone through a process a planning
process and a key component of that is a
natural resource inventory and an open
space
inventory uh what we so the process
involved basically five questions what
important natural resources occur in
town and where are they
located what open space currently exists
in other words what's already protected
out there how do natural resources and
open space align so when we overlay
those two the location of the different
Resources with our protected lands are
there gaps you know we want to look at
that that gives a strategic look at how
well we're protecting those
resources what are the goals for open
space and natural resource conservation
typically when you do a planning process
you establish the goals at the front end
of the process um but with uh
with a with a conservation initiative
you need to have the information that
you then analyze and it tells you what
resources you have what levels of
protection that then drives your um the
goals because you can look at the sort
of a gap analysis there um so then you
so we formulated some some goals which
we'll share with you for open space and
natural resource conservation in town
and then the final step and this is
often the one that uh is not paid as
much detail to but as very important the
easy part is actually the first four of
those bullets conducting the natural
resource inventory Gathering the
information and pulling it together and
doing the analysis is fairly
straightforward given the um
availability of data today and the the
um the mapping technologies that are
available online the trick is in then
taking that and looking at how those
resources and plans and goals relate to
town policies regulations and any other
town plans that might be in place for
example recreational plans Economic
Development plans and looking where
there's potential conflicts or where
there's alignments um that becomes what
I refer to as more the implementation
plan how do we go forward and meeting
these goals once we we've we've
established them based on the analysis
so uh that's a critical piece and we'll
form a lot more of the second part of
the presentation on you know what are
the recommendations for moving forward
so I wanted to go first go back to 2015
because we have to look at you know
where where were we um and in
2015 this is what basically had been
completed they um mapped permanently
preserved what they called committed
open space it was an analysis that
developed a map of that there were areas
that were mapped that were considered
undevelopable by regulations primarily
Wetlands due to regulatory um thresholds
for Wetlands they mapped areas
considered undevelopable by character
primarily steep slopes typically over
15% um then they referenced the state
plan of conservation and development the
capital region Council of government's
natural diversity database which
provides information to municipalities
on the locations of endangered uh uh and
threatened species of plants and animals
and critical habitats and they also
looked at the location of prime
agricultural soils which are also mapped
so all that information was put into a
map that was basically their natural
resource inventory at the time and what
that led to was um this is figure D from
that uh plan was their open space plan
so they identified uh all of the green
areas are areas that based on that
analys is were considered to be
protected open
space uh what they then did is they
created three uh open space corridors if
you see the dotted lines that create
these sort of polygons the the Western
Highlands open space Corridor there on
the on the on the left side the uh hop
River Corridor right through the middle
uh that follows the Hop river system and
then the Eastern Highlands open space
Corridor they pretty much anchored the
Eastern Highlands open space Corridor
was anchored by the Nathan halil State
Forest and the Western uh Highlands open
space Corridor was anchored by the
bishop swamp Wildlife Management Area
our two large State Holdings and then of
course the Hop River open space Corridor
was anchored by the location of the Hop
River and um the wetlands and soils
associated with that that system um then
all of the small small areas are Greener
the areas that I mentioned where there
was either steep slopes or Wetland soils
evident that were led to the belief that
they might be um non-developable so that
was the plan that was pretty much put in
place in
2015 so if we jump ahead to
2025 there are more data sets available
and more coming online every year um and
there's more sophisticated geog GE
geographic information systems programs
available for analysis so what we did on
the commission is we used the public
ezri the company called ezri develops
sort of the standard for the industry of
of GIS it's a system called Arc view um
it's a very sophisticated high-powered
system and if you have somebody in town
dedicated to uh GIS with expertise in it
and you have you know a system set up
and you maintain that system with
upgrades and training and so forth uh it
can be very powerful that's very
difficult for many small towns such as
Andover um to to maintain those larger
high-powered systems and Personnel
required to uh to to continue to run
those and maintain those what we did is
we used their free they have a free
public program that's available and the
value with that is it allows each
commission member can basically have a
license a free license and can basically
do analysis on their own once we create
the information we can share it and
allows a much more commission-based
approach toward looking at the
information the mapping and the data
versus having one individual or a
consultant dealing with it separately
and then sharing information because
these are living maps that are
constantly being updated uh um by the
state and by various entities providing
information that allow us to be able to
um really continue to analyze that over
the course of the uh of the 10 years of
the planet conservation devel vment and
also enable us to create our own maps
that then will talk with the other
existing maps and data and I'll show you
an example of that so these are the
these are just examples of the data that
we utilized and the data and maps that
we utilized in the analysis for
2025 were in Broad sense they were land
use land cover data sets and Maps
geological data sets and maps and
biological data sets and Maps where the
primary sources of information oh and
wetlands um D maps that we utilize so
this gives you an example of some of the
maps and information that we utilized uh
in our analysis we did create one map
that we felt was missing there is no
Statewide map for vernal pools which are
an an important water course type in
Connecticut um for a variety of
ecological reasons and water retention
reasons um and many towns you know are
faced with that that they're often times
um come up before review in in the
Wetland commissions because of
development that might occur around them
or Timber harvests or agricultural
practices so it's good to have upfront
proactive information on them so we took
an approach in partnership with the in
the wetlands commission and a citizen
science initiative to do an inventory of
the a townwide inventory of vernal pools
and we did that through GIS map
satellite image analysis and then we
followed It Up by training residents in
town um to go out with us and do um uh
surveys biological surveys of those
pools and bring that information back in
uh we partnered with the University of
Connecticut through a program that they
had a climate change program that
enabled us to get more sophisticated
analysis beyond what was available
through the free public program and
mapping so when we needed to calculate
percentage of land cover and so forth
they were able to do that for us and we
were able to take that information and
then integrate it into into our Maps um
so we did create one of our own Maps uh
to be able to utilize in this analysis
and that's the veral pool uh map that
you see there um I won't go through all
of the maps because that's a lengthy
exercise and really the the power of it
is not in looking at an individual map
but overlaying maps to look at where
there are Parcels that have high value
because of concentrations of various um
uh important natural resource variables
looking at how well those open space
corridors line up with the resources
that we have and looking for gaps so
they become it's really a process of
doing uh overlays various overlays to
analyze but I wanted to give you a sense
of the information in detail that we
looked at in our
analysis we also similar to what they
did in
2015 we referred to
the relevant Regional and state plans
that were Avail that were out there and
they included the green what's referred
to is the green plan the Connecticut's
open space acquisition plan um the
governor's Council on climate change the
climate change preparedness plan uh the
state plan of conservation development
Connecticut's Wildlife action plan which
is currently in the review in updating
process now I'm a member of the one of
the Committees that's working on that so
I had access to um a lot of the
information there um and then of course
the Connecticut uh the capitol region
Council of government's Regional plan of
conservation development uh we had a a
good opportunity early on when we
prepared a a state a grant to submit to
the state for hopefully acquiring a
property we were able to go through in
detail a lot of these plans to be able
to provide um some rationale for why we
were pursuing a part particular property
uh that eventually fell through but it
it the exercise gave us a really good
look at uh some of the state goals and
Regional goals and how they overlaid
with um the town of bover and where
where we fit into
that so the two thou so here's the this
is our 2025 draft open space corridors
and parcel map so the map that you see
here uh all the green is the state land
um the sort of lighter pink is Town land
uh the purple is the land trust we have
little bit of land trust land uh the
private to be determined I should
mentioned when they did the analysis of
protected open space in
2015 um they there was conflicting
information presented it ranged anywhere
from 18 to 29% of the Town protected uh
open space and there were several
Parcels that were considered to be
protected open space including um those
Parcels that are red and and dotted line
the Sportsman's Club the Estonian
Society owns a small parcel up there on
the north on the Bolton line and then um
uh the Harford Neighborhood Center is
the Old Camp hote property um which are
private and we we do not know what the
status of those as far as ultimate
protection a good example is they ALS o
included in that analysis um Parcels
associated with the har the um Camp
current uh which it was in private
holding but not wasn't necessarily In
prot Perpetual protection so we wanted
to be very careful on what we were
considered to be protected land so as of
now we consider those as undetermined we
didn't go into the deeds and look at
whether those were permanently protected
or whether they could uh ultimately be
sold and developed uh that's something
that's sort of hanging out there um we
did calculate we did create a a
spreadsheet with a full inventory of the
parcels and we are at
23% of the town uh in protected open
space that does not include land in
steep slopes or Wetlands because we
don't consider those to necessarily
indicate permanent protection um so they
were not included in that analysis and
they're typically not
um so and this the goal in 2015 was to
reach a 21% level of protected open
space which mirrored the state's goal of
21% so at 23% we're over that um at the
time when they calculated they used the
lower number of 18% so that I believe
they recommended that we try to pursue
an additional 240 some acres in
protected land to get to the 21% but
based on our analysis we're at 23% right
now we also did minor modifications to
the open space corridors the 2015
analysis was pretty good uh there were
slight modifications we made um to the
to the corridors basically to include uh
the skunka mug River on the Hop River
Corridor because of its ecological
connection and importance to the hop
River so it gave it a little jog to the
north and east um we also separated the
Hop River Corridor on the Far Eastern
side from what they what was originally
mapped as that um Northwestern because
ecologically they're very different
systems so we carved out the um the we
broke those up in that one area and we
also adjusted the lines slightly to
bring in some protected lands that were
not included within the original lines
um probably just an eror of uh a
transpose ER or something along that
line so there were some minor
modifications but basically the open
space corridors that we were
recommending Remains the Same with
slight
modifications um we
also went and looked at well what
undeveloped private land do we have and
this is this so This has no structures
no real houses or units like that on it
so if you take a look at the yellow uh
Parcels that are outlined those indicate
the the uh undeveloped private lands
that we have within those open space
corridors um they obviously provide
opportunities for either acquisition or
conservation easements um and I urge you
to look at the areas where we have gaps
uh like the Hop River Corridor now
arguably some of the Hop River Corridor
is protected through because of flood
plane and FEMA lines from a standpoint
of flooding but there's very little
protected open space currently within
the Hop River open space Corridor versus
the uh Eastern and um Western High
Uplands corridors which have um some
significant open space and it's easier
to build connectivity and build out from
those and than it is within the Hop
river
system we also looked at so that's the
open space analysis um one question let
me back up one one question that we do
have in the 2015 they set forth a goal
to try to achieve between 2015 and
2025 as I mentioned I think it was 284
Acres based on trying to get to that
21% so one of the questions we have is
do we want to set a new goal for open
space acquisition or not we talked about
that in our last commission meeting and
I I think um you know our sort of
philosophy on it is we're less
interested in numeric goals and more
interested in strategic goals as into
Parcels in areas that are of higher
value from a conservation standpoint and
not necessarily looking at it from a
standpoint of we need a certain
percentage of land protected rather
being more careful on where we protect
the land and what lands we protect and
how it's protected and how how and the
uses within there hopefully they're best
you know they're following best
management practices or best development
practices so that's kind of our piece
but we recognize that that's something
that should be a broader discussion
there are while we're over the 21% that
the state has the state will likely set
a new goal they didn't meet the 21%
they'll likely set a new goal because
their's ran out in 25 too and there is
talk um you know at various levels on a
concept called 30 by3 which is 30% over
the next 30 Years type of thing that
would be a stretch for us to try to hit
a 30% goal from a numeric again you know
it's it's you know what are you trying
to achieve uh but I think that's
something for the Planning and Zoning
commission to give some thought to and
if there is a desire within the town to
have more of a numeric goal uh you know
to you know to sort of serve as an
impetus for for for for going forward um
you know that's worthy of a
discussion um so goals so once we did
the analysis we looked at the natural
resources we looked at uh the open space
you know could get a sense of you know
how things lined up and where there were
gaps and so forth we we discussed we
came up with five broad goals and Within
These we have more specific goals but
the five broad goals we have are
aggregate tracks of land to create large
intact conservation areas promote
connectivity of open space Parcels with
an open space corridors those two are
pretty straightforward and um you know
our part of pretty much every
conservation plan that any municipality
or Regional group or state group has out
there because there's a broad
understanding that larger is better for
for a lot of reasons and connectivity is
is critical whether you're looking at
Trails or whether you're looking at
ecosystems um so those two then the
other is to pre protect our natural
resources as we Define as clean air
water soil and a diversity of uh native
plants and
animals um promote public awareness of
natural resources and the value uh uh
that they provide and engage the
community in conservation initiatives
and support recreational opportunities
where appropriate um the area where we
probably have the more detail developed
is number three because obviously those
are very distinct items soil you know
plants and animals water air on how you
would protect those um there are very
different potential strategies and they
line up in different areas within the
town um so we do have specific goals
associated with each of these um broader
goals so I want to jump back to 2015
real quickly so the recommendations that
came out of 215 and and they weren't in
one sort of bulleted recommendation area
they were kind of scattered about so I
made an attempt to pull them together
and I I met with Eric recently to try to
go through some of these to see what our
status was um the first one was to
evaluate development of propo proposals
in relation to the open space plan to
guide preservation and development
Footprints um and to be quite honest you
know we don't have a lot of development
pressures in town so I'm not really sure
you know how that well that's being
utilized whether the open space PL is
being utilized in that in that regard
because you know we haven't had a lot of
of development actions um you know folks
on this commission may know better than
I on um the use of that uh promote the
purchase of development rights to
preserve important farmland and they
made a point of potentially resoning um
the Post Farm which is zoned his
business to residential um so I noted
that that's sort of an incomplete and
that's a question you know whether that
that's something that wanted to be
pursued or not certainly that that area
within the in the Hop River uh Corridor
is an important area um from both
agriculture but also from ecological
from from a variety of values uh
carefully evaluate the Bal property
Bunker Hill which is located on Bunker
Hill Road status of that it's incomplete
it's sold uh that property sold to a
private owner but remains
undeveloped uh encourage participation
in the Chapter 490 program that's forest
and farm program for tax tax benefits uh
there are some we do have some farms in
town that are a part of uh various farm
programs uh which is great um but you
know as far as a desire by uh the
commission to Planning and Zoning or or
Conservation Commission whether you want
to pursue additional in 490 we didn't
really have
a feeling that needed a big push but
that's something that the Planning and
Zoning may may may want to consider
consider rezoning R40 land to r80 and
permit a right permit as right open
space subdivisions allowing 40,000 foot
Lots with 50% open space uh dedication
um that was implemented through the
Andover rural design zoning Gregs with a
40% open space
dedication uh consider mandatory open
space subdivisions in three corridors uh
the status of that was it was included
as um open space subdivisions by right
in the ards but not necessarily mandated
and then continue with the fee and L of
open space where appropriate and
supplement open space funds um through
uh budgetary allocations uh and they
also noted um applying for State
Municipal open space funds and that's
been implemented and as I mentioned we
did put an effort together to try to
purchase a a parcel but uh it fell
through and our goal was to we were
talking with the state folks through
their Open Space Program um about uh um
cost sharing for that uh for that
program and we actually got to the point
of a full proposal and and we're you
know pretty close before uh the property
was purchased by a private owner so
those are the 2015 recommendations and
kind of you know where we're at where
the town was at in implementing
those um we have drafted 2025
recommendations that's a more detailed
discussion and in conversations with Jed
it um the feeling is that that should be
a separate discussion than this this
front end one we I just want folks to
understand that we looked at three focal
areas in our recommendations one is
policy particularly around open space
planning so what are the policies you
how do we want to go ahead with open
space planning one is the two is the
regulatory realm in particular in the
wetlands commissions or Inland Wetlands
regulations and and zoning regulations
um you know we've reviewed some of the
regulations and have recommendations
there that related to regulatory realm
and the Third Realm is management
especially best management practices and
this is an area that very often involves
um more voluntary work with um uh you
know uh for example implementing best
mowing practices on town properties to
promote pollinators some of this has
already begun um connecting with land
owners to provide them opportunities for
best management of their if they have
forested properties um that we've
already had two workshops promoting nrcs
programs and we have several land owners
in town that are already pursuing uh
various initiatives through that um uh
Stronger connections with the endover
Lake management association so that
Conservation Commission is working more
cooperatively with Alma on um planning
associated with protecting that key
resource the Andover Lake uh so there's
a variety of best management and
Cooperative initiatives that can help um
protect and preserve our our resources
as well as provide awareness
opportunities for our land owners and
residents in town about the value of
these properties so we have
recommendations about those three areas
that we would like to go through with
the commission at a later
date uh to you know to talk through
those because those are the areas where
there's potential for you know do they
run up against other um uh plant that
other uh groups may have whether it's
Economic Development recre ational
development uh you know a variety of
different approaches that could could be
be
taken so I'm going to before I turn it
over to Maryann to talk about because we
do have some questions about the process
um that we have actually to the
commission I guess Jed I'd ask if
anybody has any commissions about or any
questions about the process that we
undertook or the information that we
have and I I fully realize it's a lot
and there's really sort of No Way Around
that because you know evaluating this
open space and and and these these
various natural resources involved
looking at a fair amount of information
and and analyzing a fair amount of
information and as I mentioned it we
were two years on it so we're trying to
synthesize this down into uh uh a uh you
know a manageable piece that of two
years worth of
work well uh so I know you guys have
worked uh very hard over the last two
years in your veral pool mapping thing
you know just uh
is really uh worthwhile for the town
the I was I was surprised when you went
through the goals from the uh you 2015
PCD that uh you know so many of them
were listed as
incomplete and and I know we had the
same thing when we went through our
goals of the p CD and maybe you the way
the the goals got or the recommendations
got put out there you could never get
complete you know it's always going to
be an incomplete working forward so um
so I think the Conservation Commission
is uh you know set the bar very high by
out there doing things I know I've been
personally disappointed that we have not
been able to add much to the open space
list
and so when you talk about should we
have a numerical value I was surprised
when your current analysis said we
exceeding the the current state value
and I thought you were going to say the
state was going to lower it because they
couldn't ever get around to meeting what
they'd already said but uh you're
thinking it might go up but I think
finding the right properties and be
ready when they come along is more
important than just
adding property
and uh and we even tried doing that a
couple of times you know the the piece
out on shotty Mill I thought uh we had a
really good shot at it so um one of the
things that you know
I'll as we get into budget season you
know we were able to add a little bit of
money last year and hopefully uh we can
do that again this year that won't be a
plus up that'll be just a maintain but I
I don't know that we're going to be at
the point of budget where we're looking
to uh to have to make some of those cuts
but those those cuts are going to be
coming so I will try to keep the money
going into the pot so that when the
right property comes open we'll do that
and that should be a goal of the
Conservation Commission is to be ready
to do that
too great the uh the other thing that
we've got no control over but it's been
a little bit disappointing is I like the
open space sub division
regulation unfortunately we haven't had
any big subdivisions where it could be
effective right and and the only place
where we've used that regulation there
there's been two or three open space
subdivisions but they've been for you
know a two lot subdivision where it
allowed the property owner to take
advantage of some of the
uh uh reductions in Frontage or whatever
to uh to be able to go build on the
property but we didn't and we did get
open space we just didn't get it in the
right spots we got little chunks of it
yeah here and there and so that didn't
really work out the way that I think the
regulation was
intended but we're going to keep working
on trying to get a bigger developer out
here for this uh
um Market housing or the
uh the workforce housing project and
maybe gets some that way um yeah I think
with the housing you know with the push
for housing that's going to be coming
and you know I think it's you know it
behooves towns to be ready to be able to
deal with it so even though we didn't
deal with a lot of development there at
least um it you know it's it gives us
the opportunity and you know the steps
that we're taken to actually develop the
Ard were good there were a positive
direction and they they set us up in a
good way for you know if that you know
when some of those waves and when we're
trying to push for greater residential
development where we can deal with it
more
strategically um any uh any of the other
commission members have any comments or
questions for Hank at this
point J can I make a couple comments yep
go ahead Eric um one of the things I
think the commission could do which
might have a beneficial impact
is um which is something that Hank had
mentioned to me separately is that you
could consider in the open space
corridors making the
Ard conservation
subdivision you know instead of the as
of right with the other as an option
just say that will be the the method of
subdivision in that in those borders so
that was was one thing that may push
towards because you may see somebody
come in and try to do a more
conventional subdivision in those areas
um the second thing Hank can
you do you have any way to pull up a big
pull that map up showing the open space
quarters this one okay yep that's what I
was looking for or blow it up a little
bit
yeah
um go along Cone
Road down y so that's down here right
yeah um so and I don't know whether it
would meet the uh be something you want
to
preserve um or not but there is a large
piece down there about a 60 acre piece
this right here uh I think that one's
there what what was the color yellow is
that
p490 no the yellow is basically what's
in private holding is undeveloped so
that that would meet that that's over by
where the power power line goes through
yeah yeah yeah um so I do happen to know
that that owner is would be open to
selling that property if that was
something something if that fits in to
what the town would would consider
buying um so that would be one
possibility to think of the owner lives
in New York state now so he's not
anywhere near here it's an orphan
property he's owned since the mid90s
that he planned to develop and has since
you know kind of moved on with his life
so um there's nothing on it as far as I
know although he may still have his old
bulldozzer on it but doesn't that have a
lot of property in Hein too isn't it
isn't is that or is it a separate parcel
I think it's a separate parcel I think
that was at one time one big
parcel and uh Mr Powell bought one side
and somebody else bought the other side
in the other town so that would be a
parcel that would be um a primary
candidate for partnering with the state
on because of the proximity
to uh Bishop
swamp Okay you know they're looking
they're always looking at connectivity
along you know they bought they recently
purchased that large parcel in Hein next
to gay city they're you know this whole
area they're always looking for building
out bigger and connectivity along some
of those so that would be
a would be something that would be I
think of Interest
if you ever wanted to talk to the land
owner about that I'd be happy to pass
off the contact info um for the land
owner um the other one is I know
Joshua's trust has been uh looking at
least a little bit at that property
there's a property off that abuts Nathan
hail State Forest off of of uh Wheeling
road that other big yellow one there up
here yeah yeah that's again that would
be of State interest because of
the you
know my suspicion is the property owner
would never consider selling it to the
state they would consider
par yeah uh yeah because of that but
they would consider uh you know some
sort sort of arrangement with Joshua's
trust or something along those lines
it's obviously been on on the market for
quite a while but you know they've had
basically no no serious interest in it
so those are the two big ones that I
know of that are currently you know
probably the biggest parcel in yellow is
the one that goes from Long Hill Road
and connects over to Bunker Hill um you
know that was was the old B property
that's now owned by a guy named Daniel
stobber you know and obviously that
partiel has enormous possibilities but
it just and I think we should keep
engaged with him because you know as
long as those Parcels are not developed
I mean there's opport you know to me
there's opportunities down the road and
again it doesn't have to be always
acquisition conservation easement
there's variety of different ways to um
you know protect those lands and some of
those lands like that parcel that you
mentioned Eric the old B pro parcel you
know could easily accommodate multiple
uses so there's various values
associated with those right yeah I was
surprised that whole parcel is not even
in the PA 490
program um it's not developed he has no
intention of developing it but he's
never put it in forestry which seems
kind of crazy to be paying the taxes on
it when that's an option but
yeah so Hank should you add Joshua's
trust to that list of groups that you
wanted to uh strengthen your
relationship with yeah Jed I think when
you see the recommendations that we have
that's in there okay um you know we
reached out to them when we when we were
preparing the proposal to the state they
were very supportive um very helpful to
us because obviously they have a lot of
expertise in this area they're very
supportive of what we were doing we you
know we have a good relationship with
them and I do think that they are the
land trust that I think we can jointly
work with to help um help uh protect uh
some additional land within Andover and
they seem to have an interest uh so for
sure they're ones that we believe we
need to work more closely with and and
uh more strategically
with okay well I think you know we'
we've talked for a while here let's go
to MaryAnn's slide and
uh I I I see you got some hard questions
on
there get to them there yeah thank thank
you Hank and thanks for putting the
questions in here too no problem so um
these are all the Practical questions so
we every month we talk about the pccd
and how to proceed so we've talked a lot
about what we want to recommend and what
we want to include but we don't know how
to
proceed and we want to get it right the
first time so we didn't have to redo it
and redo it and obviously we've talked
about
how this is one document for the town so
we don't want it it to look like one of
those books where everybody writes one
chapter and they're all cobbled together
so we wanted to have the same feel the
same template the same type of writing
the same type of formats for
maps and
Graphics so um we can go through these
questions one by one and maybe can give
us some guidance because everyone on the
commission is new to doing this and none
of us worked on the last plan of
conservation development so we'd like
some guidance on how to get started so
before before we go through the six here
let me just toss something out to uh
John and
I would think that this might be
something that if we were to have uh a
meeting with you me maranne and Hank and
we could you know include Eric if he
wanted to didn't necessarily have to be
there but we could work through all
these
questions and I don't know that we have
good answers for them developed yet the
only chapter we have that's close to
being done is uh Eric's complete Street
and he was kind enough to give us
something that we could just about take
and and put into the document as a
chapter so the closer we get to that the
better but I know that uh you know
John's got some a lot of thoughts on
that in and I don't have the answers to
uh a bunch of these things here but if
we could right after the the start of
the year maybe get together with the
four of us and hash through those a
little bit okay I think that would be
helpful and not take all the commission
time here trying to sort that out yes
we're we're fine with that we actually
had discussed doing that earlier um but
I know he wanted to uh meet with the
whole group first but we we're certainly
happy with going through these one by
one have you all started other than the
Eric section have you started writing
any of the other sections no le le John
has done something that I'm not aware of
well we're I'm I'm in process of writing
sort of the introductory stuff the the
stuff that doesn't necessarily need a
ton of town input um because we've we've
already done sort of the demographic and
housing updates um sort of the you know
basically the facts like what what are
the
town's what are the town status points
in terms of population and and um and
housing and things like that and uh as
well as
fitting uh you know what establishing
what the goals of the the state plan are
um you know sort of the throat clearing
about what plans of conservation are in
general so some of the the very front
end
um yeah this is the second sub the
second of the six substantive chapters
that we're attempting to to write and to
actually you know I I'll just take just
two two two moments on this um the short
answer to probably the first three maybe
fourth question fourth questions you're
asking is I think we will work together
as as Jed said um it'll be my primary
responsibility to to write the draft of
all the chapters however that said you
know Eric had done a lot of work on on
complete streets and had a lot of the
meat that it was just about sort of
structuring it and and organizing it
maybe doing a little light editing my
anticipation it'll be probably the same
obviously you've done a ton of work I
don't know how much actual sort of full
sentence Pros you guys have sort of
committed to paper um but the my my
thought would be to get that from you um
and and try to edit it into a shape that
made sense for the rest of the document
um Without Really changing too much
because you guys are are clearly the the
critical stakeholders in in thinking
about this um section so the the goal
would be to to deeply respect what
you've done and just try to put it in a
way that again makes it seem like it's
all part of the same document um and as
far as and and that's that's that's in
this process really my role is to is to
get all of the the data from the various
stakeholders and put it in a format that
makes sense um and then yeah as far as
timeline again not knowing how far along
you are with the actual sort of writing
um you know just a a list of goals a
list of of action steps is fine I can I
can you know fill in sort of Pros in
between and yeah we'd like to do that um
over the next month or two uh for this
and then at the at the very end once we
do the the six substantive chapters then
everyone will be taking a look you know
um and the commission will be looking to
to make some changes we'll be looking at
areas of potential conflict um but we're
you know the idea is to get the
substantive chapters you know largely in
shape first uh and that's that's where
we are so one of the thoughts that Eric
shared with me and I think is a very
good one that you know we as a a team
need to talk about is probably a lot of
the property that we would like to
conserve is the property that's in the
business and Industrial Zone along Route
Six and so we have to figure out how to
best serve the economic interests of the
town with the conservation interests of
the town and and that's going to be a
little bit of a trick but that's going
to come more towards the end so
we we chose to have Conservation
Commission come and present uh second
because we figured you know it's a
harder topic than complete streets but
you guys had worked on it very hard over
the last couple years so I I thought you
know we were in the best shape there and
then next we'll tackle the economic
development then we'll kind of try to
mesh the two of those together so that
we have uh you you know what the plans
for the town would be but you know as
John said if we could uh get something
done in the uh next couple months uh you
know when when we started this project I
was worried about getting the uh not
getting the thing done until sometime in
2025 now I'm worried about getting the
thing done in
2025 uh because there's still a lot
going on and it's starting to show me
just how big a project it is so uh I
think you know we'll we'll be ramping up
the process but if we could get this one
to the finish line within the next
couple of months that would really be
good the other thing that's kind of
ironic is John Eric and I you know get
together once a month to uh to talk
about things and and recently that uh
that meeting has sort of been taken over
by trying to get our zoning map up to
date we found that what had some
problems with it and we've been working
hard on that and so now I can see that
that once a month with uh you know John
and and Eric might need to go to two a
months two a month to uh get all the
things we've got to do there so I think
2025 is going to be a busy year for us
uh but we just have to start whittling
away at it and uh and so you know while
the next meeting with Eric and John
talking Maps is for the 9th of January
maybe we'll have to uh you know get do
the one for you a week or two after that
or I'll have to go back and take a look
at it and see what works out best maybe
we put this one to the head of the line
and we put the uh the map update on the
back burner till we get a little bit
more done on that and uh and do that but
but I'll let you know but it's probably
going to be a Thursday Thursdays seem to
be the days that work out uh pretty good
for us getting together to meet if that
works with you
guys so Jed just um that when you
mentioned that the challenge of of
because I agree with you I think the
challenge is going to be that hop River
Corridor and
balancing the conservation of Natural
Resources with economic development and
various business
Associated um projects that might be
looked at along that Corridor and that's
where I think the maps that we have the
the NRI Maps can be used very
effectively in that anal iCal process so
I just want to make sure that you know
as you you know you're looking at the
locations for particular areas and your
pro you're an analytical process from
the standpoint of you know business and
so forth along that Corridor you know
that's where I think we need to
coordinate so we can share our
information and maps in that process and
we can we can avoid areas where there
would be potential conflict or mitigate
in those areas through you know sort of
best development or best management
practices you know rather than
developing them separately and then
trying to you know Jam them together um
I I find it it's a better process to do
that more collaboratively it's a little
bit busier and timec consuming to do but
once you've already individually
established separate Maps then you know
it gets a little
harder so one of the things that we're
doing on the zoning map is we're you
know we're trying to one make it as
accurate as we can but two we' started
discussing should we change the current
zoning on some of those properties yeah
whether to put them back to residential
or make them you know other properties
business and and I like your
collaborative comment there that we
should look at it with with the
conservation Corridor maps on the most
important areas and make sure that we're
not going to put an industrial site uh
in the middle of of the most important
area to conserve right right yep now
that would be if if we did just that
part and got that right with this thing
that would be a big win yeah I agree
with you I agree with
you okay well I will give the give some
thought on uh when to uh to get together
and uh I'll I'll collaborate with John a
little bit on his thoughts there and
we'll see where we go on this and and uh
but we'll try to get back with uh you
two you know right after the first of
the year see if we can set something up
and uh try to get a better understanding
of the way ahead on how all that's going
to work and Hank Hank and Maran is are
you can you can you give me a a preview
of what kind of shape some of this
planning is in do do you have you
written stuff out haven't written the
text yet no okay well good so that's
probably a good spot then yeah no if if
you would be willing to share sort of
not not really beyond the PowerPoint
sort of the full list of recommendations
and and that stuff um I can I could give
you a folder in which to sort of upload
a whole bunch of stuff that would be
awesome well here's Here's a thought
should we should we wait until
after January 21st where we go through
your
recommendations Hank before we sit down
and go through these things and that way
we've we've all got you know what your
recommendations are and that might help
provide a little bit of clarity on uh um
yeah
that might make sense because I mean
that would you know as far as you know
as I said we we sort of counts the
recommendations in three different areas
you know and do you want I I want I'm
not sure how how you want to sort of
reflect it within your formats and so
forth so it may make sense for you to
see where we're going because we talk
you know we we're talking about zoning
things we're talking about you know
regulatory changes so that would relate
to other areas that you're already
analyzing in in you know in in in other
sections of the report so it that might
make sense okay yeah um yeah I think I
think there's some Merit to that and uh
okay well uh I mean do we we can I can
send those in advance I don't know
whether you want I mean we have them in
a power we have them in this PowerPoint
format grouped by that we have them all
listed out and read so I could share
that with John and you if you want if if
I don't know if you if you have it all
done uh you know if you don't have a
problem with it i' probably share it
with the commission before the next
meeting just so uh they're they've had
you know a look at it and uh ready to
absorb more of what you tell us when we
get together at that point yeah that's
exactly why I offered it because I think
it would be better you know because it's
you know I recognize that you know when
you start going through line item by
line item of these recommendations it
get get gets pretty tedious and pretty
it but if if you see it in advance and
there's particular areas you want to
focus the discussion on you know that
you know that becomes a lot easier yeah
um so that would make what do you think
maryan do we do we need to go do we need
to doing another goor round with our
with our group with the recommendations
we we don't have a December meeting
though yeah we don't uh no I think we
can go ahead with what we have
now okay let's do that well
we'll uh we'll send out uh what you got
is a read ahead we'll talk about it at
the January 21st meeting and maybe
before you know early after the start of
the Year I'll put out some proposed
dates and we'll see if we can get
something where it works for everybody
that we get together and uh and talk
about the the questions you have here
and sort out with the way ah head is
there okay sounds
good so J send that to you and then you
distribute to who you
to okay send it to John and I John and
you all right I'll send it as a PDF okay
that's fine all right perfect and out
outstanding work guys yeah that was
awesome we really appreciate how much
work you guys put into this that's been
that's
tremendous well we appreciate that I
want to thankk Hank has done such a
great job organizing this
so no it's it's a commission effort in
fact some members who aren't even with
us
anymore and Carrie cromton you know it's
been uh I hope we didn't burn them
out okay well thank uh thanks marann and
Hank and uh that'll do it for that for
tonight great appreciate again all the
the great work on putting that
together thank you Hank and Maran gonna
sign out great job
all right how get stop next next item up
on the agenda it was uh Patrick you had
uh you had indicated that you were
talking
about um the Agro tourism Agro business
stuff at uh after our last Planning and
Zoning meeting I didn't know if you had
anything for us tonight that you on
that unfortunately I now I I feel like I
should have done a PowerPoint
too but uh no just some uh key points
that I'd like to cover tonight
um uh we we had in the EDC we had some
of the similar questions that uh the
other commission had and um but our main
our main item that we address wanted to
address tonight was the AGR tourism
and uh
basically we want to have as
permissive as regulation as possible
without you
know aggravating neighbors um that being
said um a lot of our other discussion is
like why these agrotourism businesses
are important and how that that could
work in our town um I had a prepared
statement but now I'm going to kind of
throw it out the window because
um we we uh we actually talked about um
setting up a meeting with John also and
yourself so that we can go over what
we're what we'd like to write down
because um you know some of the ideas
that have been thrown around we've been
doing a lot of brainstorming and uh and
I'm hoping Bata can pipe in because she
had a lot of great ideas um but a lot of
the small businesses that we'd like to
see flourish in our town would primarily
be along the Hop River Trail and and
also near The Hop River itself but not
too close obviously you know uh there
are some developable there she is
there's some developable uh properties
that would be perfect for very small
businesses and the kind of mixed use
development that was set up in the last
plan of conservation uh the
EVC back then when I was on it decided
that you know if we had small businesses
and possibly uh small rental units for
uh housing that would be a bonus um I
know there's severe limitations along
the Hop River itself but it it would
also fit into the connected streets plan
and my main take away is that in order
for us to promote the small businesses
that we want to see in our town and
utilize the connected the connected
roads and streets and and trails that we
got to have somewhere to go and that
that led us all the way back to the
beginning when I started on EDC was uh
the recommendations for uh the hoop
River quar itself you know uh the mix
besides just the mixed use businesses
but um also more of
uh more permissive use uh but you know
not
overdeveloped um be any thoughts on that
or I think you're getting right along to
the main points that we wanted to tackle
Patrick I think really just trying to um
you know what is the basic first steps
of how do we bring in some of the
uh businesses and the growth that we're
looking to Foster um and I think it
started with the infrastructure so
making sure that the zoning regs kind of
align to allow those businesses and
development potential to come in and uh
you know actually get a project going is
really where we want it to
start so so did the uh EDC discussed the
issue with regard to uh you know the
concerts at the
farm yeah we did but considering that we
at this point in time still don't have a
sound ordinance in town and I mean we've
we've seen the extremes of of uh of no
sound after 6 pm and and and and the
extreme of midnight you know we we want
to meet somewhere in the middle and
that's why we did we did agree that we
like the proposed draft that John
already r wrote up um but we would like
to see if we can change it a little bit
here and there and um you know obviously
it's it's still a work in progress but
we we kind of went back to the whole
idea of AGR tourism and and we want to
make sure that it IT addresses the the
the businesses that we're going to be
you know hopefully attracting to our
town so I think that we should have a
meeting with John also if uh if we can
work that out and ideally it would be on
our regularly scheduled EDC meeting
night which would be tomorrow or it's
going to look like uh the the day after
Planning and Zoning meetings every month
so what time uh seven
o'clock work something else out maybe
but yeah I I I can't do it tomorrow but
I I think I have the second
Wednesday becoming wait no that'll be
third Wednesday third Wednesday becoming
fre next month but yeah we can work
something out um yeah great and also I
did like the coner the uh the wetlands
recommendation you know to uh align all
these maps and align all the all the
usages Because unless we're all working
towards the same goal like and and
considering all the other options it's
going to we don't want to really step on
each other's toes when we write this new
uh plan of conservation so the better we
can nail it down early the the smoother
it should work I
think okay and once again you guys had
an excellent PowerPoint presentation so
if they're still with
us nope that uh sounds good it is gonna
be uh it is going to be
uh well we need to we need to put
ourselves in the shoes of the neighbors
you know the draft regulation and say is
this something that uh I would like
having uh going on if I were right there
now one of the the thoughts I've had
since we got together the last time you
know and we're talking about AGR
tourism and and I don't know
if if what we see here is a
farm if what we see here is an
industrial
complex or if what we see here is a
landscape
company that happens to have a farm as a
sideline most people sell Christmas
trees is a sideline to some other
business and I know uh you know he's got
his business industrial park out there
uh and and he also has his landscape
company and
so um I don't know if that muddies the
the system up or not but uh well that's
why I I thought I'm sorry to interrupt I
thought it was important to address it
as more of a mixed use development in in
in intent you know that's why writing
these new RS is it's going to be tricky
you
know well and you can see that uh the
the article that I sent or referenced
you know that was in the River East yeah
a lot of towns are clamping down on on
the outdoor Amplified music concerts it
seems like and in
uh I don't know if that's so I don't
know how that's going to play out I know
I'm not sure that that I would like
concerts going on all the time next door
to me but uh I think there's an answer
out there um we just have to look for
that win-win solution and and it's there
we just have to find it so we'll go from
there and
uh and I'll have to talk to Eric about
how much budget we have to schedule John
for all these meetings it sounds good
but and it's it's all in the in the
realm of plan and conservation devel so
I guess part of that budget y absolutely
Mak sense okay no any any questions uh
that anybody has for
Patrick so broadly how are we defining
aggro
tourism well I was I was I was
addressing it more as an auxiliary use
in in in the the same kind of spirit as
mixed use development
so that's why I was I was going to go
down the other path of of mixed use then
then just okay this is a business lot or
this is a farm lot and then some
expanded uses so I think
it's different than some other towns
they you know the old ways of regs were
this is only what you could do here and
that's it you know
so and this is our our trial run
basically because we don't have anybody
else applying for mixed use stuff right
now I mean it' be this it would be
similar to say all right well he's got a
tree farm and he's going to throw up a
couple small housing units too right
that would be mixed use I mean I'm I'm
going to an extreme it's not apples and
apples but
um anybody else yeah I'll I'll chime in
if that's okay Eric just to address what
you said part of our discussion did
include Define
our you know agrotourism and what we
want to Define that and adding that into
the plan of conservation and development
so that you know we have a clear picture
and you know that can give us guidance
when it comes to regs and also when
people come in you know wanting to do
these type of things it's defined right
as to what that is and and uh I've done
a little research as to what Connecticut
defines that as and I think that would
probably work but that's a further
discussion that we'll have to I think
bring over to you guys a little later
well going back to the the draft that
John you presented uh back in October
you know I liked everything he wrote
about the agricultural accessory uses
had no issues with any of that it was
when he got into the non-agricultural
accessory
uses I thought it had the ability to get
carried away there just a little bit and
might need to rain that in but uh
but that's where we have to start
talking about it figure out what's good
to what's good to go and uh the last
part of that is uh you know I would hope
to avoid having anybody throughout this
process raise any questions about uh
aloa or the town having their you know
couple of concerts a year which I uh I
think go off with I'm not aware of any
complaints about any of those uh anyhow
so well if I may the Alp POA is its own
governing body like a condo association
so that the complaints would go to them
for their their concert right if I'm
unless I'm wrong and then the town town
events are town events but that was the
reason why I wanted to see this go
through as more of like a cottage
industry feeling kind of Regulation more
more aligning
to you know traditional New England you
know oh somebody's going to have a party
in their backyard and that's actually
the way the owner of the property's
referred to his events is you know well
if somebody can have a party in their
yard and and a couple speakers not a
full-blown Rock concert but you know a
couple speakers and a little band then
he that that was his leg he stands on um
and you know the other the other thing
that was brought up by another EDC
commission member was that you know what
if you have a a two Acre Farm and you
want to have these special events do you
have to have 10 acres you know that that
without a special permit and stuff like
that so we the EDC was definitely on the
more permissive side because that's
going to help the smaller I mean the
smaller the business the harder it is to
make money you know
so basically that's where we were coming
from and and and I had a Spiel for uh
how agrotourism could be looked at more
as cottage industry and Andover with our
mixed use philosophy etc etc but I guess
they said it all in a jumbled up way
tonight but no it's it but just like
with the lighting rigs you know we make
it you know you can do uh you can do
lighting but that lighting better not go
onto the neighbor's property yeah and so
so anyhow more to follow on that I think
that's thank you I appreciate hearing
what you guys were talking about and uh
and we'll go from there and I I found it
very timely that the article from
whatever other Town it was nearby that
was in the River East there
um okay next up on the
agenda is an update on the gravel bit
and
uh and one of the things that
uh that
was pointed out to me you know every
time I talk to our attorney he says make
sure you don't talk to it without being
in the executive session
so and he didn't you know I said but all
this stuff is out the public record he
says you will start talking about things
that aren't in the public record
whenever you talk about it go into
executive
session and so since we haven't talked
about it yet and I don't have much to uh
to say
there um I will make a
motion that the commission enter
executive session to discuss pending
litigation concerning the Gravel Pit
and unfortunately I can't allow
everybody here I don't expect that
discussion to be very long so if there's
people from the public that want to hang
around uh I would expect this to be a
five or 10 minute discussion but uh the
people that would be allowed to go there
would be all commission members you know
the town manager the zoning agent and
his relief and the town planner and I
think that covers the folks that uh that
would be allowed to go uh into that
executive
session okay so Jed do do you you want
me to bring the Commissioners to the
breakout room unless I well you've got
well we we need to have a second on the
motion and we have to vote for it but
that is what I would expect to be able
to do unless it takes a little bit of
work uh and I didn't give you a heads up
and because you did it so
no I mean I can I it's I'm I'm ready to
go I just I just need to know that that
who's who's not going I think who's
who's not on the commission okay sorry
go ahead so the the attendees would be
all commission members including uh you
Susan the alternate Town manager zoning
agent his relief and the town planner
and I think that's who we need to have
there so is that everyone but Bata
it uh might
be and
WJ
Catherine Catherine okay and and W jsk
is a commissioner it's Su in England yes
in England all right um okay so so
Katherine and Bata I'm gonna be pulling
everyone out uh right now but we need to
vote first okay yeah so I'm looking for
a second to that motion second
okay I think that was you Leanne yes
okay thank you and uh any
discussion hearing then I'll call for a
vote an
hi Scott
hi Patrick hi Leanne I and I vote I as
well the motion 5 z z so if you can send
this to the little breakout room already
okay next item up uh on the agenda is
824 R referral for the installation of
solar
panels and uh yes Wayne um do we have to
after coming out of executive session
aren't you are we supposed to announce
that something was discussed during
executive assession or is it was that
covered before executive
session I think if we were to be taking
we would be required to take any action
outside of executive session but since
we took no action I don't think we have
to do anything
okay so 824 for the solar
panels and I'll turn it over to
Eric and you're muted Eric
so we are the on on behalf of the first
selectman I did submit an 824 statutory
referral for the proposal to put a
roughly
125k uh kilowatt array on the uh School
building um and there's there was a
bunch of debate about whether that is a
significant Municipal Improvement or
not um but the the reason why I think
it's it makes sense as the town's
attorney has said he feels that does
need to go to public hearing he hasn't
made a formal ruling on it but that's
what he said he feels it does um and if
it does then it probably should have an
824 referral to the zoning commission
first so this is a project that is
clearly in the best interests of the
Town um it is clear in the 2015 PCD that
the Andover Elementary School is one of
the standout features of this town um
and anything we can do to uh you know
lower the cost basis for providing an
excellent
education and assisting the Board of
Education and being able to budget
wisely so this basically locks in uh a
uh much lower
cost uh
electricity um through the solar
Generation Um so I would urge you to uh
vote affirmatively on this
Rec and I know there was some confusion
because when Celeste came uh to brief us
on the solar panels
you know I think
uh I indicated that uh she didn't need
anything from the Planning and Zoning
Commission because it was as of right to
install the solar
panels and so you there can be some
confusion then why are we coming back to
the Planning and Zoning commission and
asking for an 824
referral and and the reason is because
the board of Selectmen in the town
manager is asked us for one and and I
think you know my initial thought when
we talked about it at that meeting we
did not discuss 824 referrals at all I I
didn't even think about it I just looked
at the regulations uh and saw that uh
they didn't need a Planning and Zoning
application um but the the town is
certainly you know it's it's their their
decision and and arogant I have talked
about is this a substantial Improvement
or not and I think you can build a case
either way you can build a case that it
is you could build case that it's not
one of the things that Eric shared with
me was the fact that there is
some potential liability financially
that that the town is assuming when we
go down that path and and I didn't hear
you say anything on that Eric so could
you elaborate on that just a little bit
uh so I'm not sure it's really all that
relevant to the 824 portion but it is
true that a contract for a power
purchase agreement has some pretty stiff
penalties if the town were to pull out
early not that I think that's
likely um but I think that's
a uh you
know it's something that that the town
has to deal with and that I think is why
the attorney thinks that should go to
town meeting um is because you know in
you can debate whether in our
Charter talks about leases in a power
purchase agreement isn't exactly a lease
although technically in this arrangement
we are leasing our roof space to a Solar
Company so the question is whether the
charter strictly talks about other
people leasing us stuff or whether it
also encompasses stuff we lease to other
people but either either way why I think
it's important because it makes it if if
the commission
does uh respond to this favorably and I
think it does it is consistent with the
plan of conservation and development if
it does go to go to a meeting that makes
it clear that it needs it only needs a
simple majority to pass a town meeting
and if you don't do an
824 there's some question about whether
the thresholds really
66% or 50% and and that's subject to
debate later so I would rather know
upfront that we're dealing with simple
majority um if it does go to town
meeting so that's my take on
I have some questions and comments about
goe yep
um the
824 and like you said is to ensure that
the proposed development aligns with our
town of PL plan of conservation and
development but that's something which
it's with the Board of Ed and the school
and if anybody should be bringing this
in to us it should be the Board of Ed or
the
superintendent the um Board of Ed chair
or the superintendent should be the one
bringing this and not
Eric and there is absolutely no cost to
the school or the town even if in five
years you need to be doing a repair on
the roof the company will come and
remove the required amount of solar
panels
we repair the roof we put it back on
there is absolutely no cost to the town
the only way to be a cost to the town is
that all of a sudden the school decided
no we don't want solar panels anymore
but
otherwise there is just no cost and that
early termination fee is nothing to do
with there won't be any like that
um and so I really feel like it should
be the school if the school doesn't come
to us don't give them anybody the
a24
maybe why don't we read um the
Connecticut General
statute
yeah exactly what it says it's just to
ensure that the proposed development
aligns with the town's plan of
conservation and development that's all
it is
so I've taken the liberty of sharing 824
on my screen hopefully people can see it
yep uh the I think the relevant sections
are so it's Municipal improvements so no
Municipal agency or legislative body
shall and then section two here is
locate relocate substantially improve
acquire land for abandoned sell or lease
any airport park playground school or
other municipally owned property or
public building building I think
certainly this is substantially improve
and Lease both of a municipal building I
there's no doubt I think there's no
doubt that playground school yeah right
municipally owned property so there's no
question it it I think requires an
824 um you know it doesn't say it's
Municipal agency or legislated body I
you know as to who is responsible for
bringing
it that's neither here nor there
it has to be done
yeah well so the Planning and Zoning
commission has a letter from the town
and the board of Selectmen
asking for a24
referral I think planning zoning
commission has to answer the letter now
I think you know the town is is helping
out the school because the school is not
familiar with all this stuff the school
knows a lot you know about teaching
students in
that but why why wouldn't the school be
looking at this is a good deal assist as
opposed
to uh well in this case our
superintendent Valerie is also in
Scotland Connecticut and they do have
the same thing with the solar panels
there so she knows how this works and
she knows that she does not need the
824 because she's already gone through
this with the other
school uh well that is that is
absolutely not true and you know the
towns the towns are different towns and
and that's what the whole discussion
about the the town rule is you know our
rules might be different than Scotland's
I don't know I thought the 824 was a
state law it is
and and I don't know
how that doesn't mean that it always
gets you know interpreted
it we so I'll go back to you the best
example I have is whether you need a
Wetlands permit to do a logging
operation in a wood
plot and Handover is probably one of the
few places where we do require a permit
to go through there
and Mark bran is absolutely
uh you know he says there's no question
in his mind that that's what's
required a lot of other towns don't do
it that way I don't know why they don't
do it that way but if our attorney says
that's what we should do then then
that's what we should do and uh and so I
kind of look at that you know here as
well is uh what what is the
harm I I think there's a benefit to get
the 824 referral that Eric uh discussed
with
having a smaller percentage just the
simple majority to approve it as opposed
to uh you know the higher
percentage this this helps ensure the
success why wouldn't we go that way go
ahead an I don't think the town has to
do anything the school has had the
contract with the um green sky and tit
energy
and town doesn't need to do anything
with
it they've signed the paperwork with
them and they're getting the
inspections over Christmas break and
they're all set once they get that final
inspection and then they'll come to the
town for the uh permits that are
required but that's
all okay well do you agree that
everybody wants the school to get solar
panels yes
okay um I just feel that we're go it's
not the town's position to ATS for 824
unless the school
does well that is one that I'm not you
know we're not going to solve that here
at the pl zoning commission that that
goes back to a bigger issue in
uh you know Eric doesn't the town own
the own the building
Y how I
so I uh it's not costing the town a
penny say again an it's not costing the
town of Penny to have this done on the
school yeah but it's still the
considered an improve it's not any money
spent on it so I don't see how that um
you have to involve the town with that
at all well and the commission just made
me do an 824
referral for the replacement bridge on
Bunker Hill and that is fully funded and
we are just taking out a bridge and
putting in a new bridge maybe a little
bigger the fact that that the school is
a town-owned
building has been talked about
adium it's a town-owned building but the
Board of Education is responsible for
its maintenance and everything that they
do with
it they they have the
um how would I say the uh really the
management of
it do you feel you are maintaining these
solar panels or are you installing these
solar panels they're simply allowing the
company to come and install the solar
panels is not actually installing them
themselves right so it's a lease of
Municipal property right but there are
times in where we as a commission have
made an 824 referral even without being
asked because we knew one was going to
be required and so we were trying to
speed the process up a little
bit I guess you know the way the way I
see where we are right now we've been
asked for 8
24 I think if you feel you need to have
one then go to the board of ed the Board
of Ed share or to Valerie and get her to
request
it they're not going to have to request
it and because we're going to vote on it
tonight yeah we're trying to keep the
process right we're trying to down the
road if we were it tonight you know then
then we' be get holding up to do it
after after this is done we we nobody
has to do it then I think this is this
is
uh
no no no harm delay anything to the
school in fact we are trying to just the
opposite and and keep it moving forward
just as fast as we can and it would be a
great opportunity on the easiest of all
projects to uh work together as a team
I'm a little disappointed that
we're not able to do
that
but well I I'm one person out of five so
if everybody else votes for it okay but
you know that I don't
agree but I don't think well I guess you
know we'll vote I would hate to think
that you would vote no for an 824 which
would have the potential to derail the
project and then I don't think I don't
know what would happen at that point
it's just in my mind it's easier to work
together than it is
to uh to not work together and
uh so with all that I am going to make a
motion that the commission
approves an 824
referral that the installation of solar
panels is consistent with the plan of
conservation and development and is the
right thing to
do I'll second that okay thank you
Scott any other discussion on the
motion and hearing none I'll let you
vote first an
no
okay
Scott He yes yeah
Patrick
yes
lean yes and I vote Yes as well the
motion passes
410 with an voting no
next item up thank you next item up is
the approval of the minutes from
November
19th and I'll make a motion to approve
the minutes from November
19th look looking for a second I'll
second thank you Scott any comments on
the
minutes and I have no comments on
those any comment going once going twice
go on um so I'll call for a vote on
approving the minutes
an didn't hear inan
hi
Scott hi Patrick I Leanne I I vote I as
well the minutes are approved 5
Z correspondence any respondence
jimim you're muted Jim you're muted
yep no there we
go y go ahead
Jim no correspondence
okay administrative reports Inland
Wetlands water course
uh nothing to report they received the
uh
um project for the Handover Veterans
Field and uh they'll be voting on that
at their next meeting the first week in
uh
January Jim
yeah I did meet briefly with the owner
of the package store today um who is
also the property manager for the plaza
and he is proposing a new sign which
appears to be pretty much in kind um
should should not require a a permit
from the commission require a building
permit and a zoning permit um and I did
I did suggest that he he reach out to
the economic development commission and
just make them aware of his his presence
um I I try and do that with
any anybody who comes in about a
business opportunity uh but I don't have
really have a point of contact and and
the economic develop Miss has um not
always been active so I I any
suggestions I
have who to direct those to would be
appreciated moving on I uh Jed did
report we were working on updating the
the zoning map and that's a a project
requiring a little bit of work um I did
send out at the last minute um a list of
Matrix of zoning violations I am I
haven't gotten anywhere with either
Dollar General or Ben Franklin and I am
going to move to the next step which is
um
the a letter that indicating that a fine
is is forthcoming and I have to work
with Dennis on those just because he had
asked me to for the first few went out
so I'm in the process of doing
that those need to uh do those need to
go to this your town uh adjudication
fella not until the appeal okay I got
you okay so all right yep I remember the
Dollar General is a little complicated
because now you have I mean now you have
a business
owner you have the store and you have
the property owner
and then you have corporate so there's
instead of just one or two people now
there's three makes it a little more
complicated so what's the problem over
there
J with uh Dollar
General what when they hid their their
their bike rack disappeared behind the
ice
machine and I'm looking for a storm
water report on a on the storm water
management which was required as part of
the approval have gotten it it's pretty
much
it still no bike
rack what's that still no bike
rack no well actually they did put the
bike rack in but then they stuck right
be so they put two parallel single unit
bike racks in and then they stuck an ice
machine right between them so either the
bike sticks out into the Walk Lane or
it's not really
usable
so these these are not huge very
expensive fixes it's
just it's hard dealing with a a store of
that
nature that's all I have be happy to
answer any
questions if you if you reach out to the
guy at Ridge and ask him to submit his
written restoration remediation
plan I have not I will do that yep
appreciate
it that
Leanne yes Jim speaking of the plaza I
was going to ask you if we need to um
have any discussion about the Vietnamese
restaurant that's proposed to go in
there I think they've already put up a
sign I know it's a restaurant replacing
a restaurant is there anything in
particular for us to
do
no okay it it should it should be
covered under the
regulations okay
fine and he I did indicate they were
they were coming in I believe he said I
think he said faux
Vietnamese okay but F faux meaning F the
the noodle bowl
yeah correct right
anything else Jim no okay any other
questions for
Jim okay John your
turn um yeah nothing nothing much
further I we're obviously working with
Jim and and uh Eric and Jed on the
zoning map um and we got a proposal from
our our GIS coordinator to um do that
with us so that's hopefully in in
progress um and Jim I would just note if
you can't you know if there's nobody um
clear that you want to direct the uh
businesses to in terms of Economic
Development I'd be happy to to feel that
and and uh be a first point of
contact thank
you that's it for
me okay any questions for John
next up is a commission discussion and
miscellaneous anybody got anything they
want to bring up at this
point okay we'll move on to public
comment I see uh Katherine still here ba
is still here any comments for us
Katherine I just want to wish everyone
on the commission and everyone
involved the best of the
holidays and I appreciate you're
allowing me to participate for the last
of years as you have done thank you
you're
welcome
VA no comment from me great discussion
happy holidays to all thank you okay
very
good I don't think there's anybody else
from the public out
there um next meeting is going to be on
January
21st it'll be on Zoom
um Jim and I talked earlier today about
what the the nature of the public
hearing uh would we want to try and do
an inperson then I think with January
I'll I'll stick with the zoom I
uh I don't know that there's going to be
any big interest for a public hearing on
that uh and if they do I think the the
zoom Works uh fine to support that so
it'll be Zoom only at this point and uh
January 21st 7
o'clock and that'll be a public hearing
and followed by the regular
meeting
um and uh last but not least uh as we
heard from uh our public members here
I'd like to wish everybody happy holiday
season as well it's coming up awful fast
I can't believe it's here already the
year's coming to an end but uh wish
everybody uh Merry Christmas happy
holidays and uh have a little bit of
time off same Merry Christmas
yep and thank the commission for all its
hard work in this
year and even more in the next
year it's going a busy year coming up
2025 I think I'll make a motion that we
adjourn second second okay 908 all in
favor raise your
hand any opposed any abstaining motion
passes
500 thank you all very much for a great
year as I say it's G be a busy one enjoy
the holiday season and we'll hit it
again hard uh 2025
good night
everybody night good night